[docu-2771] Configure TLS + Troubleshooting (#5070)
Kong/docs.konghq.com: app/_src/gateway/production/networking/configure-tls.md

  * Encryption: The data that is transmitted between {{site.base_gateway}} and the PostgreSQL server is encrypted using symmetric key encryption, this means the same key used to encrypt the data is used to decrypt the data. This method protects your data from unauthorized access. 
  * Data integrity: With TLS your data is protected during transport.
* Disadvantages: 
  * Complexity: Configuring and maintaining secure TLS connections require the management of certificates and may add additional complexity to your {{site.base_gateway}} instance.
  * Performance: Encrypting and decrypting data consumes additional computing resources which can impact the performance of {{site.base_gateway}}. 

This guide will show you how to configure TLS on PostgreSQL and {{site.base_gateway}} to secure your data in transport. 

## Prerequisites <!-- Optional -->

* [OpenSSL](https://www.openssl.org/)
* TLS support enabled in PostgreSQL

>   * If you are installing a pre-packaged distribution, or using the official docker image, TLS support is already compiled in.

Author: fixed

To setup Postgres server with TLS enabled you have to configure the following parameters in the `postgresql.conf` file:

```bash
ssl = on #This parameter tells PostgreSQL to start with `ssl`. 
ssl_cert_file = '/path/to/server.crt' # This is the default directory, other locations and parameters can be specified. 
ssl_key_file = '/path/to/server.key' # This is the default directory, other locations and parameters can be specified. 
```

With these settings the server will establish a secure communication channel with a client using TLS, and if the client supports TLS proceed with the TLS handshake and establish a secure connection. In the case where a client does not support SSL or TLS the system will fall back on an unsecured connection. 

The key files that are referenced in the PostgreSQL configuration must have the right permissions. If the file is owned by the database user, it must be set to `u=rw (0600)`, you can set this using the following command: 

`chmod 0600 /path/to/server.crt`

If the file is owned by the root user, the permissions for the file must be `u=rw,g=r (0640)`, you can set this using the following command: 

`chmod 0640 /path/to/server.crt`. 

> Certificates issued by intermediate certificate authorities can also be used, but the first certificate in `server.crt` must be the server's certificate, and it must match the server's private key. This is because the certificate must match the private key of the server, and the intermediate certificate authority to establish a chain of trust. 

Author: ```suggestion
Certificates issued by intermediate certificate authorities can also be used, but the first certificate in `server.crt` must be the server's certificate, and it must match the server's private key. This is because the certificate must match the server's private key and the intermediate certificate authority, to establish a chain of trust. 
```

```bash
pg_ssl = on
pg_ssl_required = on
pg_ssl_verify = on
pg_ssl_version = tlsv1_2
lua_ssl_trusted_certificate = system,/path/to/ca/chain.crt
lua_ssl_verify_depth = 1
```
For more information about the following parameters, please read the configuration {{site.base_gateway}} [PostgreSQl settings documentation](/gateway/latest/reference/configuration/#postgres-settings), as well as the specific documentation for [`lua_ssl_trusted_certificate`](/gateway/latest/reference/configuration/#lua_ssl_trusted_certificate), and [`lua_ssl_verify_depth`](/gateway/latest/configuration/#lua_ssl_verify_depth). 

### {{site.base_gateway}} mTLS configuration

If mTLS is required, {{site.base_gateway}} needs to be provide a certificate to the PostgreSQL server during the handshake process. This can be accomplished by adding these two settings to `kong.conf` 

```bash
pg_ssl_cert = '/path/to/client.crt'
pg_ssl_cert_key = '/path/to/client.key'
```

* **`pg_ssl_cert`**  The absolute path to the PEM encoded client TLS certificate for the PostgreSQL connection. Mutual TLS authentication against PostgreSQL is only enabled if this value is set.

> * **`pg_ssl_cert_key`**  If `pg_ssl_cert` is set, the absolute path to the PEM encoded client TLS private key for the PostgreSQL connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **`pg_ssl_cert_key`**  If `pg_ssl_cert` is set, the absolute path to the PEM-encoded client TLS private key for the PostgreSQL connection.
```

> The client certificate **must** be trusted by one of the specified certificate authorities. The certificate authorities are set in the `ssl_ca_file` in the PostgreSQL configuration file `postgres.conf`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The client certificate **must** be trusted by one of the specified certificate authorities. The certificate authorities are set in the `ssl_ca_file` parameter in the PostgreSQL configuration file `postgres.conf`. 
```

> ## Creating Certificates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Creating certificates
```

Certificates can be created with OpenSSL using the default settings. 

### Intermediate CA chain 

An intermediate CA chain is a chain where each certificate is issued by a different CA, and the last certificate in the chain is issued to the server or the client. 

> Generate root CA private key and self-sign a root CA certificate, from the terminal using these steps: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the terminal, generate a root CA private key and self-sign a root CA certificate using these steps: 
```

> 1. Generate a root CA cert key pair:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Generate a root CA cert-key pair:
```
or maybe cert:key?

Author: I like cert-key

    ```sh
    openssl req -new -x509 -utf8 -nodes -subj "/CN=root.yourdomain.com" -config /etc/ssl/openssl.cnf -extensions v3_ca -days 3650 -keyout root.key -out root.crt
    ```

> 2. Generate an intermediate private key and certificate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Generate an intermediate private key and certificate:
```

    1. Generate the CA private key and certificate signing request (CSR):
        ```sh
        openssl req -new -utf8 -nodes -subj "/CN=intermediate.yourdomain.com" -config /etc/ssl/openssl.cnf -keyout intermediate.key -out intermediate.csr
        ```
    1. Change the private key permissions:
        ```sh
        chmod og-rwx intermediate.key
        ```
    1. Create an intermediate CA certificate signed by the root CA: 
        ```sh
        openssl x509 -req -extfile /etc/ssl/openssl.cnf -extensions v3_ca -in intermediate.csr -days 1825 -CA root.crt -CAkey root.key -CAcreateserial -out intermediate.crt
        ```

> 3. Generate server private key and certificate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Generate the server private key and certificate:
```

>     1. Generate a server private key and certificate signing request (CSR)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    1. Generate a server private key and certificate signing request (CSR):
```

        ```sh
        openssl req -new -utf8 -nodes -subj "/CN=dbhost.yourdomain.com" -config /etc/ssl/openssl.cnf -keyout server.key -out server.csr
        ```
    1. Change the permissions of the private key:
        ```sh
        chmod og-rwx server.key
        ```
    1. Create a server certificate signed by the intermediate CA:
        ```sh
        openssl x509 -req -in server.csr -days 365 -CA intermediate.crt -CAkey intermediate.key -CAcreateserial -out server.crt
        ```

> 4. Generate a private key and certificate for the client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Generate a private key and certificate for the client:
```

    1. Generate a client private key and certificate signing request (CSR):
        ```sh
       openssl req -new -utf8 -nodes -subj "/CN=kong" -config /etc/ssl/openssl.cnf -keyout client.key -out client.csr
       ```
    1.  Change the permissions of the private key:
        ```sh
        chmod og-rwx client.key
        ```
    1. Create a client certificate signed by an intermediate CA: 
        ```sh
        openssl x509 -req -in client.csr -days 365 -CA intermediate.crt -CAkey intermediate.key -CAcreateserial -out client.crt
        ```

> 5. Append the certificates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Append the certificates:
```

    1. Complete the CA chain:
        ```sh
        cat intermediate.crt > chain.crt
        cat root.crt >> chain.crt
        ```
    2. **Optional**: append `intermediate.crt` to `server.crt`:
        ```sh
        cat intermediate.crt >> server.crt
        ```
        This step is typically done when the server is configured to use a certificate chain that includes the intermediate CA. If the server is not configured to use a certificate chain, or if the intermediate CA is already included in the `server.crt` file, this step is not necessary. 
    3. **Optional**: append `intermediate.crt` to `client.crt`:
        ```sh
        cat intermediate.crt >> client.crt
        ```
        This step is typically done when the client is configured to use a certificate chain that includes the intermediate CA. If the client is not configured to use a certificate chain, or if the intermediate CA is already included in the `client.crt` file, this step is not necessary. 

### Chain without intermediate CA

> In this case the certificate chain where is signed directly by the root certificate authority instead of an intermediate CA. This type of chain may be used in situations where the certificate is issued by a well-known and trusted root CA, and the level of security and trust provided by an intermediary CA is not necessary. 

Reviewer: I'm not sure what's missing or what word is wrong in the first sentence here, but something doesn't make sense. Is it supposed to be "In some cases, the certificate chain can be signed directly by the root certificate authority instead of an intermediate CA"?

Author: ```suggestion
In some cases, the certificate chain can be signed directly by the root certificate authority instead of an intermediate CA. This type of chain may be used in situations where the certificate is issued by a well-known and trusted root CA, and the level of security and trust provided by an intermediary CA is not necessary. 
```

Author: yup

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

{:.important}
> **Important:** Not using an intermediary CA can be less secure than using an intermediary CA, because the chain is shorter, and there are no additional layers of security that would normally be provided by the intermediary. 

```
Moved from below.

1. Generate a root CA cert key pair:

    ```sh
    openssl req -new -x509 -utf8 -nodes -subj "/CN=root.yourdomain.com" -config /etc/ssl/openssl.cnf -extensions v3_ca -days 3650 -keyout root.key -out root.crt

> 

Reviewer: This is missing the closing backticks for the codeblock; can't add as a suggestion though.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
    ```
```

> 2. Generate server private key and certificate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Generate server private key and certificate.
```

>     1. Generate a server private key and certificate signing request (CSR)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    1. Generate a server private key and certificate signing request (CSR):
```

        ```sh
        openssl req -new -utf8 -nodes -subj "/CN=dbhost.yourdomain.com" -config /etc/ssl/openssl.cnf -keyout server.key -out server.csr
        ```
    1. Change the permissions of the private key:
        ```sh
        chmod og-rwx server.key
        ```
    1. Create a server certificate signed by the intermediate CA:
        ```sh
        openssl x509 -req -in server.csr -days 365 -CA intermediate.crt -CAkey intermediate.key -CAcreateserial -out server.crt
        ```

> 3. Generate a private key and certificate for the client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Generate a private key and certificate for the client.
```

    1. Generate a client private key and certificate signing request (CSR):
        ```sh
       openssl req -new -utf8 -nodes -subj "/CN=kong" -config /etc/ssl/openssl.cnf -keyout client.key -out client.csr
       ```
    1.  Change the permissions of the private key:
        ```sh
        chmod og-rwx client.key
        ```
    1. Create a client certificate signed by an intermediate CA: 
        ```sh
        openssl x509 -req -in client.csr -days 365 -CA intermediate.crt -CAkey intermediate.key -CAcreateserial -out client.crt
        ```

> 4. Create a server and client certificate directly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Create a server and client certificate directly.
```

>     1. Create a server certificate signed by the root CA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    1. Create a server certificate signed by the root CA:
```

        ```sh
       openssl req -new -utf8 -nodes -subj "/CN=kong" -config /etc/ssl/openssl.cnf -keyout client.key -out client.csr
       ```

>     2. Create a client certificate signed by the root CA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    2. Create a client certificate signed by the root CA:
```

        ```sh
        openssl x509 -req -in client.csr -days 365 -CA root.crt -CAkey root.key -CAcreateserial -out client.crt
        ```

> Not using an intermediary CA could potentially be less-secure than using an intermediary CA, because the chain is shorter, and there are no additional layers of security that would normally be provided by the intermediary. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Moving this to the start of the section.

### Self-signed certificates for testing

Self-signed certificates should **only** be used for testing.

> 1. Generate server key and self-signed cert

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Generate server key and self-signed cert:
```

    ```sh
   openssl req -new -x509 -utf8 -nodes -subj "/CN=dbhost.yourdomain.com" -config /etc/ssl/openssl.cnf -days 365 -keyout server.key -out server.crt
   ```
2. Change private key permissions: 
    ```sh
    chmod og-rwx server.key
    ```
3. Generate the client key and self-signed certificate:
    ```sh
    openssl req -new -x509 -utf8 -nodes -subj "/CN=kong" -config /etc/ssl/openssl.cnf -days 365 -keyout client.key -out client.crt
    ```
4. Change the permissions of the private key: 
    ```sh
    chmod og-rwx client.key
    ```

> Because in this case you are using a self-signed certificate, the `client.crt` should be specified in the `ssl_ca_file` parameter, and the `server.crt` should be specified in the `lua_ssl_trusted_certificate` parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you use a self-signed certificate, the `client.crt` should be specified in the `ssl_ca_file` parameter, and the `server.crt` should be specified in the `lua_ssl_trusted_certificate` parameter.
```

### {{site.base_gateway}} mTLS configuration

If mTLS is required, {{site.base_gateway}} needs to be provide a certificate to the PostgreSQL server during the handshake process. This can be accomplished by adding the following settings to `kong.conf`: 

```bash
pg_ssl_cert = '/path/to/client.crt'
pg_ssl_cert_key = '/path/to/client.key'
```

* **`pg_ssl_cert`**  The absolute path to the PEM-encoded client TLS certificate for the PostgreSQL connection. Mutual TLS authentication against PostgreSQL is only enabled if this value is set.

* **`pg_ssl_cert_key`**  If `pg_ssl_cert` is set, the absolute path to the PEM-encoded client TLS private key for the PostgreSQL connection.

The client certificate **must** be trusted by one of the specified certificate authorities. The certificate authorities are set in the `ssl_ca_file` parameter in the PostgreSQL configuration file `postgres.conf`. 

## Creating certificates

Certificates can be created with OpenSSL using the default settings. 

### Intermediate CA chain 

> An intermediate CA chain is a chain where each certificate is issued by a different CA, and the last certificate in the chain is issued to the server or the client. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An intermediate CA chain means the leaf certificates (the server or the client certificate) are issued by an intermediate CA, not issued directly by the root CA. 
```

        ```sh
        openssl x509 -req -in client.csr -days 365 -CA intermediate.crt -CAkey intermediate.key -CAcreateserial -out client.crt
        ```
5. Append the certificates:
    1. Complete the CA chain:
        ```sh
        cat intermediate.crt > chain.crt
        cat root.crt >> chain.crt
        ```
    2. **Optional**: append `intermediate.crt` to `server.crt`:
        ```sh
        cat intermediate.crt >> server.crt
        ```
        This step is typically done when the server is configured to use a certificate chain that includes the intermediate CA. If the server is not configured to use a certificate chain, or if the intermediate CA is already included in the `server.crt` file, this step is not necessary. 
    3. **Optional**: append `intermediate.crt` to `client.crt`:
        ```sh
        cat intermediate.crt >> client.crt
        ```
        This step is typically done when the client is configured to use a certificate chain that includes the intermediate CA. If the client is not configured to use a certificate chain, or if the intermediate CA is already included in the `client.crt` file, this step is not necessary. 

### Chain without intermediate CA

> In some cases, the certificate chain can be signed directly by the root certificate authority instead of an intermediate CA. This type of chain may be used in situations where the certificate is issued by a well-known and trusted root CA, and the level of security and trust provided by an intermediary CA is not necessary. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In some cases, the certificate chain can be signed directly by the root certificate authority instead of an intermediate CA. This type of chain may be used in situations where the certificate is issued by a well-known and trusted root CA, and the level of security and trust provided by an intermediate CA is not necessary. 
```

{:.important}

> > **Important:** Not using an intermediary CA can be less secure than using an intermediary CA, because the chain is shorter, and there are no additional layers of security that would normally be provided by the intermediary. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Important:** Not using an intermediate CA can be less secure than using an intermediate CA, because the chain is shorter, and there are no additional layers of security that would normally be provided by the intermediate CA. 
```
